(feat): short short doc on snapshot testing (#255)
chalk-ai/docs: snapshot-tests.mdx

---
title: Snapshot Tests
description: Snapshot testing with Chalk
---

> Snapshot testing is a really effective way of ensuring that your features are not dramatically changing

Author: ```suggestion
Snapshot testing is an effective way of ensuring that your features are not dramatically changing
```

between deployments. You can set up snashot testing in Chalk by leveraging Chalk [Datasets].

Typically, snapshot testing will be part of a CI (continuous integration) workflow. Pull requests will automatically
trigger tests which verify that code changes have not caused feature distributions shifts.

In this section, we'll demonstrate the process of writing snashot tests using pytest and Github Actions.

## Overview

To set up snapshot testing, we'll write a couple pytest fixtures and a test. The fixtures will pull your current
snaphot data and create a new snapshot based on your current code. The test will then compare the distributions of
the features in your old and new datasets.

> In this example we'll be testing that snapshot testing the features on the following feature class:

Author: ```suggestion
In this example we'll be snapshot testing the features on the following feature class:
```

```python
from chalk.features import features
import datetime as dt

@features
class User:
    id: int
    full_name: name
    birthday: dt.datetime
    age: float
```

> In this example, we resolve the `full_name` and birthday of our User's from from a Postgres database. The age, we calculate using an online resolver:

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, we resolve the `full_name` and birthday of our User's from from a Postgres database. The age feature is calculated using an online resolver:
```

> In this example, lets say we resolve the `full_name` and birthday of our User's from from a postgres database. The age, we calculate using an online resolver:

Author: ```suggestion
In this example, we resolve the `full_name` and birthday of our User's from from a Postgres database. The age, we calculate using an online resolver:
```

```python
from chalk import online
from chalk.features import Now

@online
def birthday_resolver(bday: User.birthday, now: Now) -> User.age:
    return now.year - bday.year - ((now.month, now.day) < (bday.month, bday.day))
```

> Though this is a rather trivial example, lets set some expectations for our feature distribution shifts:

Author: ```suggestion
Though this is a rather trivial example, lets set some expectations for our feature distribution shifts between snapshots:
```

> Though this is a pretty trivial example, lets set some examples on how we expect the data to drift between invocations:

Author: ```suggestion
Though this is a rather trivial example, lets set some expectations for our feature distributions:
```

- We expect a User's birthday to never change,

> - We expect User's full_name to change in a maximum of 0.001% of our users (1/100,000),

Author: ```suggestion
- We expect a User's full_name to change in a maximum of 0.001% of our users (1/100,000),
```

> - We expect age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality average age will increase by exactly the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).

Author: ```suggestion
- We expect age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality average age increases by precisely the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).
```

> - We expect age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality average age increases by precisely the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).

Author: ```suggestion
- We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality average age increases by precisely the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).
```

> - We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality average age increases by precisely the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).

Author: ```suggestion
- We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality, average age increases by precisely the amount of times between invocations of our snapshot test).
```

> - We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality, average age will increases by precisely the amount of time between invocations of our snapshot test).

Author: ```suggestion
- We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 30 days (in reality, average age will increase by precisely the amount of time between invocations of our snapshot test).
```

## Writing the Test

First we'll write two fixtures: the first sets up a Chalk Client and the second creates your new snapshot (using
the previous snaphot to make sure that the exact same ids are being pulled).

```
from chalk.client import ChalkClient
from chalk.features import DataFrame
from src.feature_sets import Transaction, User
import datetime as dt
import pytest
import pandas as pd

@pytest.fixture(scope="session")
def client():
    return ChalkClient(branch=True) # Uses your current git branch

@pytest.fixture(scope="session")
def snapshots(client: ChalkClient):
    # The dataset name will be set to the latest commit on the branch
    branch_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_SHA"]

    # The snapshot will find the dataset with the
    latest_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_HEAD_REF"]

    main_snapshot = client.get_dataset(dataset_name=latest_commit)
    main_snapshot_df = snapshot.to_pandas()

    branch_snapshot = client.offline_query(

>         input=active_snapshot[User.id].to_list(),

Author: ```suggestion
        input=active_snapshot[User.id].to_list(),
        recompute_features=True,
```

def snapshots(client: ChalkClient):
    # The dataset name will be set to the latest commit on the branch
    branch_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_SHA"]

    # The snapshot will find the dataset associated with the last merged snapshot
    latest_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_HEAD_REF"]

    main_snapshot = client.get_dataset(dataset_name=latest_commit)
    main_snapshot_df = snapshot.to_pandas().set_index(User.id)

    branch_snapshot = client.offline_query(
        input={User.id: main_snapshot_df.index.to_list()},
        recompute_features=True,
        wait=True,
        dataset_name=branch_commit
    )
    branch_snapshot_df = branch_snapshot.to_pandas().set_index(User.id)

    return active_snapshot_df, branch_snapshot_df

# Note, we skip this test locally since we only want to run it in CI
@pytest.mark.skipif(os.getenv("CI") is None, reason="Skipping on local machine")
def test_transaction_aggregations(snaphot_dfs: tuple[pd.DataFrame, pd.DataFrame]):
    main_snapshot, branch_snapshot = snapshot_dfs

    # Birthdays should not change
    assert main_snapshot[User.birthday].equals(branch_snapshot[User.birthday])

    # Full names should not change in more than 0.001% of users

>     assert (main_snapshot[User.full_name] != branch_snapshot[User.full_name]).mean() < 0.00001

Reviewer: why are we taking the mean here?

---
title: Snapshot Tests
description: Snapshot testing with Chalk
---

Snapshot testing is an effective way of ensuring that your features are not dramatically changing

> between deployments. You can set up snashot testing in Chalk by leveraging Chalk [Datasets](/docs/datasets).

Author: ```suggestion
between deployments. You can set up snashot testing in Chalk by leveraging [Datasets](/docs/datasets).
```

Typically, snapshot testing will be part of a CI (continuous integration) workflow. Pull requests will automatically

> trigger tests which verify that code changes have not caused feature distributions shifts.

Author: ```suggestion
trigger tests which verify that code changes have not caused feature distribution shifts.
```

In this section, we'll walk through the process of creating snapshot tests using Pytest and GitHub Actions.

## Overview

To set up snapshot testing, we'll write a couple Pytest fixtures and a test. The fixtures will pull your current
snapshot data and create a new snapshot based on your current code. The test will then compare the distributions of
the features in your old and new datasets.

In this example we'll be snapshot testing the features on the following feature class:

```python
from chalk.features import features
import datetime as dt

@features
class User:
    id: int
    full_name: name
    birthday: dt.datetime

>     age: float

Author: ```suggestion
    age: int
```

```

In this example, we resolve the `full_name` and birthday of our User's from a Postgres database. The age feature is calculated using an online resolver:
```python
from chalk import online
from chalk.features import Now

@online
def get_age_in_years(bday: User.birthday, now: Now) -> User.age:
    return now.year - bday.year - ((now.month, now.day) < (bday.month, bday.day))
```

Though this is a rather trivial example, lets set some expectations for our feature distribution shifts between snapshots:
- We expect a User's birthday to never change,
- We expect a User's full_name to change in a maximum of 0.001% of our users (1/100,000),
- We expect a User's age to change by a maximum amount of 2 years (in reality, average age will increase by precisely the amount of time between invocations of our snapshot test).

## Writing the Test

First we'll write two fixtures: the first sets up a Chalk Client and the second creates your new snapshot (using

> the previous snapshot to make sure that the exact same ids are being pulled).

Author: ```suggestion
the previous snapshot to make sure that the exact same User ids are being pulled).
```

```python
from chalk.client import ChalkClient
from chalk.features import DataFrame
from src.feature_sets import Transaction, User
import datetime as dt
import pytest
import pandas as pd

@pytest.fixture(scope="session")
def client():
    return ChalkClient(branch=True) # Uses your current git branch

@pytest.fixture(scope="session")
def snapshots(client: ChalkClient):
    # The dataset name will be set to the latest commit on the branch
    branch_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_SHA"]

>     # The snapshot will find the dataset with the

Author: ```suggestion
    # The snapshot will find the dataset of the last merged snapshot
```

>     # The snapshot will find the dataset of the last merged snapshot

Author: ```suggestion
    # The snapshot will find the dataset associated with the last merged snapshot
```

    latest_commit = os.environ["GITHUB_HEAD_REF"]

    main_snapshot = client.get_dataset(dataset_name=latest_commit)
    main_snapshot_df = snapshot.to_pandas().set_index(User.id)

    branch_snapshot = client.offline_query(

>         input=main_snapshot_df.index.to_list(),

Author: ```suggestion
        input={User.id: main_snapshot_df.index.to_list()},
```

        recompute_features=True,
        wait=True,
        dataset_name=branch_commit
    )
    branch_snapshot_df = branch_snapshot.to_pandas().set_index(User.id)

    return active_snapshot_df, branch_snapshot_df

# Note, we skip this test locally since we only want to run it in CI
@pytest.mark.skipif(os.getenv("CI") is None, reason="Skipping on local machine")
def test_transaction_aggregations(snaphot_dfs: tuple[pd.DataFrame, pd.DataFrame]):
    main_snapshot, branch_snapshot = snapshot_dfs

    # Birthdays should not change

>     assert main_snapshot[User.birthday] == branch_snapshot[User.birthday]

Author: ```suggestion
    assert main_snapshot[User.birthday].equals(branch_snapshot[User.birthday])
```

    # Full names should not change in more than 0.001% of users
    assert (main_snapshot[User.full_name] != branch_snapshot[User.full_name]).mean() < 0.00001

>     # Age should not change by more than 30 days

Author: ```suggestion
    # Age should not change by more than 2 years between runs
```

>     assert (main_snapshot[User.age]-branch_snapshot[User.age]).dt.days.abs().max() < 30

Author: ```suggestion
    assert (main_snapshot[User.age]-branch_snapshot[User.age]).dt.days.abs().max() <= 2
```

>     assert (main_snapshot[User.age]-branch_snapshot[User.age]).dt.days.abs().max() <= 2

Author: ```suggestion
    assert (main_snapshot[User.age] - branch_snapshot[User.age]).dt.days.abs().max() <= 2
```

```

## Writing the GitHub Action

The GitHub Action sets up the environment and then runs `pytest`. Because the

> GitHub Action is set to run on `pull`, we have access to not only the

Author: ```suggestion
GitHub Action is set to run on `pull`, we automatically have access to not only the
```

active commit (in the environment variable `GITHUB_SHA`), but also the
target commit of the pull request (in the environment variable `GITHUB_HEAD_REF`).

```yaml
name: Chalk Integration Test

on: pull

jobs:
  chalk-test:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    steps:
      - uses: actions/checkout@v4

      - name: Setup Python
        uses: actions/setup-python@v4
        with:
          python-version: '3.10'
          cache: 'pip'

      - name: Install dependencies
        run: pip install -r requirements.txt

      - uses: chalk-ai/deploy-action@v2
        with:
          client-id: ${{secrets.CHALK_CLIENT_ID}}
          client-secret: ${{secrets.CHALK_CLIENT_SECRET}}
          # Deploys Chalk to a branch environment
          branch: ${{ GITHUB_REF_NAME }}
          # Waits for the deployment to succeed (Optional, default false)
          await: true

      - name: Runs the Snaphot Test
        run: |

>           # Example of making a query directly against a branch

Author: ```suggestion
```
